Docs:  Update the Elasticsearch data source docs (#73415)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/datasources/elasticsearch/query-editor/index.md

- **Metrics** - Metrics aggregations perform calculations such as sum, average, min, etc. They can be single-value or multi-value. See [Metrics aggregations](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-metrics.html) for additional information. Use metrics aggregations in the metrics query type in the query builder.

- **Pipeline** - Elasticsearch pipeline aggregations work with inputs or metrics created from other aggregations (not documents or fields). There are parent and sibling and sibling pipeline aggregations. See [Pipeline aggregations](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.9/search-aggregations-pipeline.html) for additional information.

## Common options

There are several different types of queries you can create using the Elasticsearch query editor. The following options are available for all query types.

### Add query

Regardless of query type, you can create multiple queries by clicking **+ Add query**.

### Inspector

> Click **Inspector** to get detailed statistics regarding your query. Inspector functions as a kind of debugging tool that "inspects" your query. It provides query statistics under **Stats**, request response time under **Query**, data frame details under **{} JSON**, and the shape of your data under **Data**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Query inspector** to get detailed statistics regarding your query. Inspector functions as a kind of debugging tool that "inspects" your query. It provides query statistics under **Stats**, request response time under **Query**, data frame details under **{} JSON**, and the shape of your data under **Data**.
```

This was recently renamed to `Query inspector` to be consistent between Explore and dashboard https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/73603

  - **Label** - Add any labels to filter by.

Configure the following options for the **geo hash grid** bucket aggregation option:

   - **Precision** - Specifies the number of characters of the geo hash.

Configure the following options for the **histogram** bucket aggregation option:

  - **Interval** - Group by a type of interval. There are option to choose from the dropdown menu to select seconds, minutes, hours or day. You can also add a custom interval such as `30d` (30 days). `Auto` is the default option.
  - **Min doc count** - The minimum amount of data to include in your query. The default is `0`

The **nested** group by option is currently experimental, you can select a field and then settings specific to that field. 

Click the **+ sign** to add multiple group by options. The data will grouped in order (first by, then by).

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/elasticsearch/group-by-then-by-10.2.png" max-width="850px" class="docs-image--no-shadow" caption="Group by options" >}}

### Logs query type

Logs queries analyze Elasticsearch log data. You can configure the following options:

- **Logs Options/Limit** - Limits the number of logs to analyze. The default is `500`.

> #### Logs volume panel

Reviewer: I still think that this whole section `Logs volume panel` and `Logs panel` should not be here, cause it is not related to query editor. We don't do it for metrics or raw query results. And I think it could be confusing for everyone who uses Elasticsearch in dashboard/alerting, as `Logs volume panel` and `Logs panel` are just visualisations used in Explore.

Author: Because it's there when you open the query editor, we should document what it is.  I personally am not sure query editor docs should be under data sources, as it's basically clicking on Explore, and Explore is documented elsewhere.

Reviewer: But if you open Elasticsearch editor in Dashboard, it is not going to be there - see https://play.grafana.org/d/play-elastic-web-logs/elasticsearch-8-web-logs?orgId=1&editPanel=1
[<img width="1484" alt="image" src="https://github.com/grafana/grafana/assets/30407135/6153c70a-47a9-4efb-bd8f-1d8ff6ea5aa8">](https://play.grafana.org/d/play-elastic-web-logs/elasticsearch-8-web-logs?orgId=1&editPanel=2)

- **Metrics** - Metrics aggregations perform calculations such as sum, average, min, etc. They can be single-value or multi-value. See [Metrics aggregations](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-metrics.html) for additional information. Use metrics aggregations in the metrics query type in the query builder.

- **Pipeline** - Elasticsearch pipeline aggregations work with inputs or metrics created from other aggregations (not documents or fields). There are parent and sibling and sibling pipeline aggregations. See [Pipeline aggregations](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.9/search-aggregations-pipeline.html) for additional information.

## Common options

There are several different types of queries you can create using the Elasticsearch query editor. The following options are available for all query types.

### Add query

Regardless of query type, you can create multiple queries by clicking **+ Add query**.

### Inspector

> Click **Inspector** to get detailed statistics regarding your query. Inspector functions as a kind of debugging tool that "inspects" your query. It provides query statistics under **Stats**, request response time under **Query**, data frame details under **{} JSON**, and the shape of your data under **Data**.

Author: Since they are part of the query editor they should be included.

  - min - see [Min aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.9/search-aggregations-metrics-min-aggregation.html)
  - extended stats - see [Extended stats aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-metrics-extendedstats-aggregation.html)
  - percentiles - see [Percentiles aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.9/search-aggregations-metrics-percentile-aggregation.html)
  - unique count - see [Cardinlaity aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.9/search-aggregations-metrics-cardinality-aggregation.html)
  - top metrics - see [Top metrics aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.9/search-aggregations-metrics-top-metrics.html)
  - rate - see [Rate aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.9/search-aggregations-metrics-rate-aggregation.html)

You can select multiple metrics and group by multiple terms or filters when using the Elasticsearch query editor.

> Use the **plus icon** to the right to add multiple metrics to your query. Click on the **eye icon** next to "Metric" to hide metrics, and the **garbage can icon** to remove metrics.

Reviewer 2: These steps get lost when not a numbered list.

  - terms - see [Terms aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-bucket-terms-aggregation.html).
  - filter - see [Filter aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-bucket-filter-aggregation.html).
  - geo hash grid - see [Geohash grid aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-bucket-geohashgrid-aggregation.html).
  - date histogram - for time series queries. See [Date histogram aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-bucket-datehistogram-aggregation.html).
  - histogram - Depicts frequency distributions. See [Histogram aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-bucket-histogram-aggregation.html).
  - nested (experimental) - See [Nested aggregation](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-aggregations-bucket-nested-aggregation.html).

> - **@timestamp** - Depicts timestamp data options. Set this when configuring the Elasticsearch data source in the **Time field name** under the [**Elasticsearch details**](/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/elasticsearch/configure-elasticsearch-data-source/#elasticsearch-details) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Time field** - Depicts date data options. The default option can be specified when configuring the Elasticsearch data source in the **Time field name** under the [**Elasticsearch details**](/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/elasticsearch/configure-elasticsearch-data-source/#elasticsearch-details) section. Otherwise **@timestamp** field will be used as a default option. 
```

- **Interval** - Group by a type of interval. There are option to choose from the dropdown menu to select seconds, minutes, hours or day. You can also add a custom interval such as `30d` (30 days). `Auto` is the default option.

  - **Min doc count** - The minimum amount of data to include in your query. The default is `0`.
  - **Thin edges** - Select to trim edges on the time series data points. The default is `0`.
  - **Offset** - Changes the start value of each bucket by the specified positive(+) or negative (-) offset duration. Examples include `1h` for 1 hour, `5s` for 5 seconds or `1d` for 1 day.
  - **Timezone** - Select a timezone from the dropdown menu. The default is `Coordinated universal time`.

Click the **+ sign** to add multiple group by options. The data will grouped in order (first by, then by).

> {{< figure src="/static/img/docs/elasticsearch/group-by-then-by-10.2.png" max-width="850px" class="docs-image--no-shadow" caption="Group by options" >}}

Reviewer: All of these options (starting with time field and ending with timezone) are specifically for `Date Histogram` , so if we want to add documentation for them, I think they should be under `date histogram`. 

Different types of bucket aggregations have different options. So for example `terms` accepts any field (not timestamp) and has different options such as `Order`, `Size`, ...
<img width="1040" alt="image" src="https://github.com/grafana/grafana/assets/30407135/8350f67c-74b3-4f7f-a760-e649feafd3d3">

Author: I will add options for each type of group by (bucket aggregation) option - I totally missed this so thank you for pointing this out. :-)

Author: added group by/bucket aggregations fileds

### Logs query type

Logs queries analyze Elasticsearch log data. You can configure the following options:

- **Logs Options/Limit** - Limits the number of logs to analyze. The default is `500`.

> #### Logs volume panel

Reviewer: I would mention that Logs volume panel and Logs panel are available in Explore. 

In dashboard, when you run logs query, you need to select logs panel as visualisation. Moreover, in dashboard, you can't select logs volume panel.

- **Time** - Toggle to do display the time column. This is the timestamp associated with the log line as reported from the data source.

- **Unique labels** - Toggle to do display the unique labels column that includes only non-common labels.

- **Wrap lines** - Toggle if you want the display to use line wrapping.

- **Pretty JSON** - Toggle to pretty print JSON data to make it easier to read.

- **Deduplication** - Makes repetitive log data easier to read. `Exact` matches are done on the whole line with the exception for date fields. `Numbers` matches are done on the line after stripping out numbers such as durations, IP addresses, and so on. `Signature` is the most aggressive deduplication as it strips all letters and numbers and matches on the remaining whitespace and punctuation. The default is `None`.

- **Display results** - Change the order of received logs from the newest first (descending order) to oldest first (ascending order). The default is `Newest first`.

- **Download** - Click to download log results in either `txt`or `json` format.

> Click on a specific log to get an expanded details view of each log, which provides additional information including `fields` and `links` attached to the log lines. See [Log details view](/docs/grafana/latest/explore/logs-integration/#log-details-view) for more information.

Reviewer: I am wondering if it is enough to just have a link to `Logs in Explore` and not to duplicate the documentation for Logs option here as well. I am worried that it might get out of sync.

Author: Now that there is a dedicated data source writer I think it's ok to leave this here. I'm setting up a cadence to review data source documentation periodically.

### Raw data query type

Run a raw data query to retrieve a table of all fields that are associated with each log line.

> - **Raw data size** - Number of raw data log lines. You can specify a different amount. The default is `500`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Raw data size** - Number of raw data documents. You can specify a different amount. The default is `500`.
```

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
The option to run a **raw document query** is deprecated as of Grafana v10.1.
{{% /admonition %}}

## Use template variables

You can also augment queries by using [template variables]({{< relref "./template-variables/" >}}).
=======
Queries of `terms` have a 500-result limit by default.

> To set a custom limit, set the `size` property in your query.

Reviewer: This is not related to template variables.
